Introduction

Data acquisition is a key aspect of every experiment, since 
without it nothing can be learned. During the history of science, 
instrumentation and knowledge formed a feedback loop, where 
better instruments have provided humans with better understanding 
of natural fenomena which allows the develpment of more advanced 
instruments. This relation is cleary visible on the development 
of electronics during the past decades. Long running physics 
experiments are naturally sensitive to these developments and the 
design of their data acquisition systems must take this into 
account. As these systems become ever more complex, the concept 
of CODAC emerges. CODAC stands for Control, Data Access and 
Communication and can be considered an extension of the CODAS 
(control and data acquisition system) as it treats all systems 
that are part of an experiment (namely control of the experiment, 
data collection, data access and plant security) as a whole. 
Although te specific needs of an experiment must be taken into 
account when designing a CODAC, there are several key features 
that should be taken into acount. This thesis uses the 
implementation of a CODAC for a specific experiment as the 
starting point for a study on how to design a CODAC for modern, 
large physicals experiments, taking into account not just their 
specific needs but also a boarder view.

1.1 Motivation

With the installation of the COMPASS tokamak in Prague, it was 
necessary to install a CODAC system for the experiment. Over the 
years, new diagnostics and actuators were expected be installed 
and thus required to be integrated on the CODAC. The operation 
would be based on the novel ATCA control and acquisition boards 
developed on IPFN (Instituto de Plasmas e Fusão Nuclear). These 
possess advanced technical features, namely state-of-art FPGA for 
signal processing, multi-Gigabit/s point-to point serial links 
for super-fast data sharing across all the input channels and a 
sub nano-second synchronous timing/event distribution network. 
This system was similar to the one used on the ISTTOK tokamak in 
Lisbon. The knowledge obtained during the design, installation 
and maintenace can be extrapolated to other experiments, future 
and current, thus becoming the basis for the work presented on 
this thesis.

1.2 COMPASS

Tokamak COMPASS (COMPact ASSembly) is installed in the Institute 
of Plasma Physics (IPP) of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Republic since 2006. It was designed in the 1980s in the British 
Culham Science Centre to study plasma physics in circular and D 
shaped plasmas, with the purpose to prepare for ITER scenarios. 
In fact, the relations between its dimensions are very similar to 
those of ITER. At the turn of the 21st century, the Culham 
Science Centre started working with a new spherical tokamak, the 
Mega Ampere Spherical Tokamak (MAST), and so operation of COMPASS 
was discontinued. However, due to its relevance for the ITER 
project, it was offered to IPP - Prague which had experience with 
small tokamaks.

As before, the main objectives of COMPASS are related to ITER, 
specially:

• study of H-mode physics (there are only two other operational 
  tokamaks in Europe capable of this regime);

• MHD equilibrium and instabilities;

• Plasma-wall interaction;

• Physics of runaways and disruption;

• Developments of advance diagnostic methods;

1.3 ISTTOK

Tokamak ISTTOK (Instituto Superior Técnico TOKamak) is installed 
in Lisbon at the institute that gives it the name and is explored 
by IPFN. It is a small tokamak with a circular cross-section, a 
poloidal graphite limiter and an iron core transformer, that was 
built from the former TORTUR tokamak, which was de-commissioned 
by the Association EURATOM/FOM in 1988. The ISTTOK construction 
started, officially, on January 1st, 1990, date on which the 
contract of association EURATOM/IST enter into force. The 
operation of this experiment in an inductive regime started on 
February 1991. Its main objectives are:

• Teach and train personnel (mainly university students) in 
  physics, engineering and technologies associated with nuclear 
  fusion;

• Development of new diagnostic techniques and to develop and 
  test digital instrumentation dedicated to control and data 
  acquisition.

Since 2012, thanks to fast electronics developed at IPFN and 
real-time control, ISTTOK has been operating on AC discharges, 
where the direction of the plasma current changes quickly enough 
to allow the pulse to be continued, keeping a somewhat constant 
plasma density without saturating the iron core. This has allowed 
discharge duration to go from 25-40 ms up to more than 0.5 s 
(although the typical discharge is around 200 ms).

